um Mackenzie work is an australian-born
writer and Scholar she is known for her
writings on media Theory critical theory
New Media and the situationist
international her best known works are a
hacker Manifesto and gamer Theory but
among many others such as General in uh
General intellects
um General intellects and um uh
capitalism is dead
um she is Professor of media and
cultural studies at the new school in
New York City
um and with that uh let's turn it over
to Mackenzie we'll be back for a custom
conversation afterwards
hi there and thank you for having me at
gray area Festival my name is Mackenzie
walk all let me start by sharing some
slides with you
all right here we go
um
all right so uh worlding protocol uh is
our theme and I want to
um I'm going to address both the words
in that title in a minute uh I want to
sort of frame it in terms of our a
project here of what would Democratic
collaborative knowledge work look like
how could we think about that as a
project and a project where no forms of
knowledge are considered sovereign over
all to the others so just imagine a
utopian world where Engineers don't
think they have the answer to everything
and Humanities goals don't think they
have all the answers and others don't
think they're doing something completely
different for everybody else and
economists don't rule Our Lives we have
all forms of knowledge being able to
work in a collaborative Democratic
egalitarian way what would that world
look like and maybe we have to create
something like that knowledge practice
in order to revert the worst possible
consequences of the anthropocene
and another thing I'd like to say about
this is that the gaps and
incompatibilities between all these
different ways of knowing might
themselves be worth knowing it's not
like all of these different kinds of
knowledge can can sort of add up to
something that there's always sort of
inconsistencies and incompatible
incompatibilities between them
I do want to talk though about uh the
humanities as a set of knowledges uh
that might be interesting contributors
of speculative qualitative Concepts
derived from the study of the archives
and various cultures and emotions in the
present forms of various cultures
from the tea I just had
all right so
let me give some examples
um drawn from various uh Humanity
Scholars that I know and here I want to
talk about protocol and whirling before
we move on to some other things
uh Alexander Galloway wrote this
actually I think really helpful use
about a useful book about protocol
um in 2003 I think nearly 20 years ago
uh and the key point to that is the key
concept is a protocol is controlled with
decentralization so let's not forget
ourselves a distributed uh network is
one that lacks control and protocol here
you could think of as uh ways of
deciding at a border uh what passes and
what doesn't but where there's an
asymmetrical relation at that juncture
at that border as to what can pass and
what part so maybe one of our questions
is can protocols be democratized and
what might that look like maybe we don't
want everything being able to pass every
border all the time but who decides and
where and how seems like a set of key
questions to ask about protocols
and let's uh think a bit about worlding
and here I want to think about the work
of Eduardo duderos De Castro sorry I
can't pronounce that in Portuguese and
I'm drawing mostly on a book with the
wonderful and intentionally ironic title
of cannibal metaphysics which is mostly
about amerindian myth uh myth or really
world view of philosophy from uh from
the Amazon
and here it's important to realize there
are lots of very different World Views
and we can't really always uh see what
other ones look like from our own as
kind of why we need to sort of work of
uh ethnographers and others to show how
the world used to us
and uh what's interesting to me about uh
virus de Castro is the idea of rather
than think about a multi-species world
and there's a lot of that now there's a
lot of work in uh the humanities sort of
and the art sort of moving outwards from
the human centered uh towards what have
Incorporated other species into how we
think uh about what it means to be
uh but what's interesting about what uh
virus Castro does with amerindian World
Views is that they're actually
multi-people World Views uh and that's
the thing that that strikes me as
interesting about it because uh virus to
Castro is talking about World Views uh
of amerindian peoples who happen to be
human who kind of proposed that there
are worldviews of other species but with
those other species think of themselves
as people and us as not so from the
point of view of Jaguars Jaguars are
people and we humans are not so it gets
us to the incompatibility and
irreconcilability of World Views I think
so when we think about worlding who's
worlding and others worldings
incompatible might be some questions
that work like this would help us ask
uh and then let me just gesture a little
bit towards the work of Elizabeth
pavanelli uh we have like life writing
is sort of a big category it's taught in
universities now but what's sort of
non-life writing maybe uh there's a
little bit too much privileging of the
living when we think about you know
extending uh towards the uh
incorporating other species and how we
think and act uh so how do we
incorporate rocks how do we uh
incorporate the lithosphere uh so Geo
geontologies is the title of this book
uh playing ontologies which is you know
philosophies of being and Geo meaning
the Earth uh and uh I want to just dwell
on one particular story that pavanelli
tells from uh Anson Bay in the Northern
Territory in Australia and here is that
place in one system of representation uh
as a kind of uh nautical map if you like
um but maybe there's others and
interests me is uh the figure of triple
which is a name from a story that's also
a name of a coastal tidal Creek that's
uh in the hidden way in that map and let
me just tell you uh triple story as told
to polvinelli by a uh uh Ruby uh who is
and and this is my my sort of redaction
of um Elizabeth's redaction of this
traditional story
she's a story triple is a beautiful
teenage girl who decides to dress as a
young man making hunting implements in
men's clothes she travels down the coast
doing different things including
spearing and wallaby
and the Crux of her story isn't
encounter with an older man a bird tells
her the man approaches so she lies on
her belly to hide her female nurse now
thinking Triple A young man the older
man bids her to get up and cook the
wallaby and chipple refuses so he takes
the ball again leaves another word comes
and tells that man that the older man
that triple is female he returns they
have a fight and he wins the fight so I
love it because it's a transgender story
about a Greek but transgender is an
acronistic one Western term uh and other
because it's a story that
um narrates a landform and is a way in
which the humans of this particular area
are able to think about the rocks and
the creek and the landforms themselves
as in a sense people of that area that
need a certain kind of care or they
might sort of turn away from the human
people who are operating world and it's
interesting to me that it's a story that
in in modern Western terms is between
genders it's a place between I used to
be a place between different peoples who
spoke slightly different languages it's
a place between regions it's a creek
that you have to cross
different kind of ecologies different
places where you can find different
kinds of food and they're also different
genders is in there as well so in in
what way could we learn from traditional
forms of Storytelling and knowledge how
to connect to those kind of things you
know sort of more abstract modern world
the country we live in
one thing I'll point out about uh
traditional uh Australian knowledge I
don't know about in this example but
certainly in other parts of uh Australia
there's forms of Storytelling that
predate the Holocene but go back to the
late histocene era so these uh this is
knowledge continuously being produced
and shared and passed on uh with some
degree of accuracy uh through the entire
geological Epoch that
um sort of Western people like myself
our entire knowledge of the world is
confined to the Holocene and his people
with a prior knowledge that they've been
able to pass on towards the anthropocene
so maybe if one wants to learn about the
change in India how to live through the
change in a geological era there are
reasons traditional knowledges might be
able to help us with that but you know
it's almost their job to help us maybe
it's their job to endure as best they
can and enduring us has been us being in
white westerns like myself maybe that's
that's their business
uh and I want to just table another
colleague in the humanities doing
different kinds of work and the concept
of the wake in Christina Sharp
um and the subtitles on Blackness and
being and the Wake here is wakefulness
so being uh alert to uh the sort of
political cultural and historical
dimensions of one situation but wake
also means mourning uh and it means the
ripple effect uh left by passage of a
ship and the the image is drawn from the
passage of slave ships and then what is
the ongoing uh kind of residue and trace
of that uh through contemporary uh in
this case uh American life also black
diasporic life elsewhere and how do we
pay attention to these stories that tend
to get left out uh even of modern forms
of knowledge archives and so forth
so I'm just giving some examples of
people I think who are doing interesting
work uh in the humanities at the moment
that's you know dealing with parts of
you know the uh the elephant that we're
all in our variously disabled ways to
try to touch various parts of produce a
normal job
but what would be collaborative
knowledge word in the anthropocene in
particular call it something else if you
like but we seem to have entered a
geological error uh that's no longer the
Holocene and one way I would explain
that is that maybe what's happening is
that geological time is moving faster
now than historical time uh we seem to
just relentlessly produce more and more
of the same uh technical economic
commodified exploitative World
um but geological time is changing way
faster than that uh the seasons seen
time scenes out of joint Seasons happen
at the wrong time no matter whether
where it shouldn't be California is on
fire every summer as is my homeland in
Australia so what would be Concepts
adequate to this present situation uh
and some more importantly ways of
working that get us out of
habits of you know only sort of
market-based for authoritarian based
relations between different forms of
knowledge production
so maybe one thing we need to do is or
could do or could use is ways of working
with Concepts what do I mean by concept
what well this is the simplest way I can
explain it a good fact is mostly true
about something in particular and a good
concept is slightly true but about a
whole bunch of things so how do we
generate Concepts that enable us to grab
the factual or by the handful and then
be able to articulate different concepts
together so that knowledge workers can
kind of produce ways of interacting with
the world uh hopefully Redeeming the
possibility of a world uh in the process
so that's that's if you like the big
picture about practice
uh all right so let me throw in some
more uh colleagues friends and
collaborators
um Ben is also in this uh Festival uh
but I find this concept of the stack
really useful for thinking differently
about the sort of technosphere that
we're inhabiting and here is the a
diagram of the stack has been proposed
as we think about it where we uh
interact as users through our devices
uh through a series of layers of a
attack it's a technical term expanded
into a more General metaphor so as user
we're dealing with an interface that has
a layer of addressability that's able to
know where certain things are and
connect them we may or may not be
working in some version of the city
which gathers together the the human
people part of it uh but it's connecting
our physical addresses to addresses in a
cloud but at the end of the day what
it's doing is extracting resources out
of the earth Beyond any capacity of the
earth to regenerate that so that's
that's basically the stack
I thought about it a little differently
as the thing Vector uh and it's to me
the the to sort of put a slightly
different metaphor against that one
um maybe we see things a little bit
differently uh so the the if that's a
stand which particular
possibilities of connection through it
get articulated and why is is then
a slightly more to press a little more
critically on it would be how I want to
think about it and then we have
something about who owns and controls
those factors who designs the protocols
you know for whom so that we end up with
a kind of a technosphere uh the stack of
vectors through it or protocols
controlling the movement through it
there's kind of extracting more out of
the earth than the earth can possibly
sustain in the interests of our own so
billionaires can go to space great
that's really not a world that's going
to last very much longer so
here's a map of what that world might
look like by Martin vargic and it's
interesting to me that the the image of
this map of metaphor of this map is to
think basically Empire is basically to
think a sort of geopolitic sort of uh
this kind of like giant kinds of
corporation that are maybe of something
of a new type and might require sort of
a new language to thank them
so who does I'm in control uh protocols
stack and decide which vectors are
possible through it I'm going to call
the ruling class of our time vectoralist
class owners and crawl control as a
vector vector give it its simplest
definition uh in Geometry as a line of
fixed length but no fixed position it's
a term that means slightly different
things from different Sciences let's
keep it that simple so it's something
that has a fixed quality uh techniques
tend to have particular affordances but
the question of How It's deployed and
for whom and why remains open and
something that we can ask critical
questions about
so what does A Plus Class do control
values change for control of information
it's a little different to capitalism
where you sort of have to own the the
factory uh in order to exploit the labor
that's in it uh networks class isn't
that interested in owning the uh
physical means of material production
but of owning the uh information uh that
controls those processes of production
and consumption so maybe that's a new
kind of drawing class
um and and requires a different language
to think it uh if there's a new ruling
class maybe there's a new kind of
subordinate class alongside the other
there's still farmers in the world and
still workers but maybe there's also a
hacker class producers of information
produces a difference so it's different
to Industrial labor where your job is
designed so you just keep doing the same
thing over and over again it's not the
kind of work you have to actually
produce difference it could be captured
as intellectual property uh in the
interests of a class sit on some
controls information that those of us
who merely eat oil in it don't get to
work so that's the sort of basic diagram
if you like how I want to think
the larger historical uh dimensions of
the technosphere that were all inside of
and I think it's worth having a a map of
power of conflict in that world because
these are sort of the questions that
were confronted yeah it's like how can
we redesign the vector on the fly to do
something other than extract Surplus
information out of populations whether
they be of rocks other species in the
various to Castro's terms other people
and and human out of human labor and out
of the hacker class and so on
so can the vector do something other
than extend the wake of forgetting and
violence uh in Christine Sharpstown
specifically of the African diaspora one
can think of other ways that the vector
does violence to
um the material and and living in human
dimensions of the world and then the
third question is can historical time
catch up to geological time and avert
the worst mass extinction the good
Futures are mostly gone now how do we
avoid the worst of the bad Futures that
would seem to be the if one is future
oriented that would be the tasks for the
present the answer is nobody knows
nobody knows how to do that uh and I'm
kind of skeptical of people who think
they've got you know like all embracing
answers to this completely unprecedented
circumstances that we find ourselves in
so I my wager is on speculative
collaborative non-hierarchical knowledge
and experimentation as a key component
of thinking away to the possibilities of
Futures we might sort of actually want
so I've talked a little talk mostly
about work but what about play if we're
talking about experimentation maybe
there's ways that a more playful
approach is going to yield uh
possibilities that work doesn't
uh now I I wrote a little gamer theory
about the way that uh it's like the
whole of life has been kind of gamified
we're all inside the sort of Matrix of
vectors and all encodes think of
ourselves as little like players in and
against it and against each other uh so
there's there's a way in which play gets
uh turned into a sort of uh commodify
information commodified universe you
know where it's as if the playing field
was level and uh and all that it's sort
of not really the case yeah does anybody
really believe that
um but maybe there have been kind of
avant-gardes of play that escape that
that felt like play was the way to kind
of Imagine other cities for other lives
different forms of uh organization ways
of Being Human uh ways of being with
things other than the human uh so I've
came in theory was my sort of more
pessimistic book about the enclosure of
the world and game space for the
benefits of the vectors class uh there's
other little beach beneath the street
about the sort of tradition of uh that
we can sort of latch on to finding the
archive of uh ways of thinking playfully
about the possibility of of living
differently
so I wanted to finish up with some uh
work I've been doing more recently that
connects to that I've done some
historical work uh on avant-garde
movements I love avant-gardes because
they're sort of
um experimenting with the media of their
time and looking for uh you know you
know like immigrants are kind of like
the antennae of the culture uh sort of
trying to detect what could be possible
and to bring out of the future of
something that could be possible in the
in the present to make that that future
real to sort of physically manifest it
on the left here is uh Michelle
Bernstein asked yawn unknown woman and
and either board uh in the late 50s
um plotting kind of
um uh the revolutionization of Art and
everyday life and in the whole world
over uh
over car towels and bottle of wine which
you notice has been spilled on the table
okay I love that uh why don't have grand
Ambitions and I've paired it with a
photograph of um myself at um boss no
Pacific Club after I'd hosted my own uh
techno Brave birthday party with um
trans raver friends uh because I've been
trying to work on
um what can I learn from the play space
that is
a new or queer trans uh ravo techno
nightlife uh so maybe there's areas of
experimentation in ways of um of Being
Human and being together in that
universe and maybe there's ways that
that world uh either is looking for ways
to
inhabit a present uh because there isn't
a future or ways that other Futures
might be possible just in terms of how
we interact with each other so that's
that's the work I've been doing and I'm
now sharing some some slides and talk a
little bit about that that current work
um all right so uh I'm interested in
mostly it's kind of illegal Warehouse
Brands where you're sort of like
descending into spaces that are sort of
remade uh for other purposes and there's
ways in which the old industrial spaces
particularly light industrial spaces of
the city sometimes yields these spaces
that can be repurposed and one can think
about them by repurposing uh
retrofitting if you like we don't get to
make uh worlds entirely out of nothing
or it's having to like repurpose a world
temporarily uh to become something else
to create a situation that we might want
to inhabit uh for an evening where light
sound so a mix of people uh how people
dress all the chemistry is going to
create the possibility of being together
something that humans seem not all that
humans of this kind seem not all that
good at doing
so I became a kind of uh ethnographer of
um you know sort of queer on trans Rave
nightlife
um there's me probably with making notes
on my phone taking a picture uh at one
of these these particular events and we
see people interacting we see a little
bit of uh
deck that's running the audio uh
constructing like Sonic spaces this
seems really key uh here also to kind of
uh drowning out the uh chatter of the
human uh and the sound of the city with
even more sound it's all like texturing
it it's maybe one of the keys to
creating kind of other possibilities
uh this is someone putting their uh
fingers over my phone because I'm too
close to the center of the dance floor
when I'm trying to take a picture I was
only trying to photograph the ambience I
was not trying to take photos of people
but still some of these parties are
strictly no photo uh you're really not
supposed to document them no selfies of
you with the DJ Behind you no pictures
of the people no videos and I think
that's kind of an interesting principle
uh in a world of kind of overexposure uh
to kind of Hive off something that's not
that that's going to sort of refuse that
um you know use of the the vector uh
it's it's a paradoxical sort of
relationship there's a way in which you
only find out about these parties by
following certain
um Instagram accounts some of which are
private uh so there's there's a way
social media sort of creates a space a
possibility but one that's been
attempted to be a little bit remote from
it where one can experiment
in the you know sort of
relative intimacy of bodies with each
other uh with you know sort of um
fog and light and so forth so this this
creates a bit of a problem as a
researcher how am I supposed to research
a world where I can't really document it
um because I think the consequences of
thinking the nofoto ban as a researcher
is like oh I probably shouldn't name
where this party is or who runs it or
who is there what happens in their state
there so how to do that and I started to
think about how we can think about
ambiences how we can get away from
certain kinds of Storytelling uh and
write about what the ambient creation or
the situation collaboratively by groups
of people looks like and maybe that's a
useful way of sort of decentering
narratives of you know heroic individual
stories with Beginnings middles and ends
uh what's a language and a photographic
practice that's going to kind of evoke
the middle the the in-betweenness of
people with each other are various kinds
of modern techniques and tools that
we're bringing together so that we kind
of imagine what it would be like to be
human together at least in this
temporary space and time this whole
pocket of time that we can open up
before the police arrived or before it
all shuts down at 8 A.M in the morning
and we all stumble out into the into the
overly Bright Light of the morning
so yeah I've been trying to photograph
the ambiances of spaces uh and kind of
think through what kinds of ambiances
help generate what kinds of uh
interactions between people
um to get us away from this sort of
situation really where there's like one
person speaking to many uh what's it
like you know you still have a a host
and a promoter of the sort of DJ and
some people follow particular DJs and
I've answered them including myself but
how do you sort of move it back towards
kind of collaborative production uh
collaborative production of knowledge
um but here knowledge of One's Own body
in relation to others uh in the dark in
the flashing light uh with some chemical
alteration of your perception and so
forth some of the ways one could learn
from that and with what goes wrong with
it I don't want to make out that uh Rave
is a space of Utopia because it's not uh
it's a space where bad things happen
where people it uh sexually assaulted
and harassed where people overdose but
people just behave like complete
[__] like as as punishers uh of
others but then what are the ways within
the extended community of people who are
queer and trans Raiders in on the New
York scene how are those uh conflicts
and behaviors mediated
away from the now's four but also on it
would be a set of questions I think but
uh useful for thinking through what you
know what kind of Life Is Possible
what's at the limits of the human
without imagining we have to all be
perfect angels but we're our bad selves
have ways of
um being
checked accepted checked
and moved back into the possibility of
being with others
so the
ambiances uh conducive if you like to
states that take you out a little bit of
you know kind of obsession with ones uh
with oneself into a kind of dissociated
states where you can sort of blend into
the environment towards others but not
to encroach too much on their boundaries
other ways in which you can think of
rape practice than a sort of analogues
for a waste that we might uh kind of
interact uh with each other outside of
that space so there's other ways that
one can learn
through the creation of situations where
you take away certain conventions or
sensory perception of
recognition of each other such that a
different way of being together might be
possible I don't say new there's really
nothing new about this and speaking of
of wakes there's ways in which
I think it's very important to recognize
is that you know kind of techno music
and nightlife in the United States it
was a tremendous amount to
African-American culture and and those
of us like myself who come to it from
elsewhere have to recognized I think
that we're guests in uh culture we
didn't really create we may have added
some flavors too but uh it's it's we're
recognizing that we're in the wake of
the historical process uh of people who
only had the night and had to create
this space to be away from the police
away from racism and so forth uh this
also it applies in an analogous not
identical way to Korean trans people
often we don't have anywhere else so we
have to create these spaces where uh I
want to say different rules apply but
different modes of interaction apply but
where we get to be people uh in Worlds
where you know even as a white trans
woman in this world where I'm not uh I'm
not people I don't get to be human
uh I'm not recognized as belonging to
that to the hymn community so we create
spaces where we are and then hopefully
we can bring some of that back out into
the rest of the world so that's um
basically what I want to leave you with
I kind of started with ways of thinking
about what the humanities might bring to
collaborative practices of knowing
together
I walk through some work that I think is
kind of interesting that we can draw
together here
I've sort of highlighted you know both
uh
[Music]
power dynamics of the present which I
think there's a new kind of rule in
class uh one really doesn't seem to have
any uh ways of uh surviving the after
scene uh boys want to be on Rockets go
into space
uh I'm sorry it's not really going to
work for the rest of us
so
um are there ways we could
work together collaboratively to produce
different forms of knowledge and other
ways of playing together it might
produce different kinds of knowledge and
knowledge that you can make operative
and the example that I've given about is
sort of queer and transmutual nightlife
not that it's anything special about
that it just happens to be the little
world but I I inhabit at night when I'm
not teaching and doing these things
during the day
so that's what I want to contribute to
gray area festival and thank you for
having me I'll be back for question time
bye everybody welcome back we're live
with MacKenzie Warwick who you just
heard from
um that was a wonderful presentation and
you led us through so many different
um ideas and you know I just want to you
know the one idea that I'm the most
familiar with and I've studied before is
the virus de Castro and his concept of
the ontological turn
um you know and this this idea that we
all are existing from our own subjective
points of view and those are shaped
collectively but are so different from
every being to every other being
um and I was wondering if just to start
us off you could tell you could tell us
a little bit more about about the about
this idea and how thinking thinking
through the worlds in this ontological
way might help us to reach a different
kind of working protocol
yeah and and you know I'm not an
ethnographer uh I'm only a reader of uh
who had a viveros de Castro you know
site so and and I I sort of think of my
work as interstitial in that sense I'm
not an expert in these things but is
there a way of reading in between so
that's a little caveat uh and um and his
sort of key work is on uh amerindian uh
ontologies is I guess a word you could
use and it's sort of I think really
helpful to imagine that there could be
plural ones uh like ontology meaning you
know like what is being what has being
uh there's a tendency to think that uh
would have to be a universal
um but maybe it's not and there's
there's an interesting way that uh
vivirus de Castro reads uh admirindian
uh World Views from sort of from the
Amazon or thereabouts uh is having this
sort of perspective or quality where uh
you know to the to the humans the the
Jaguars are are not people because
humans are people but to the Jaguars
the humans are not people because
Jaguars are people like it's able to
imagine this reversibility uh of Worlds
and and I think that's oh wow there's
there's something sophisticated about uh
amerindian philosophy that that uh uh
the sort of German idea was tradition
its inheritors doesn't have so yeah I
found found that incredibly useful and
that would be sort of one of uh the
tasks for collaborative knowledge uh of
enduring the anthropocene is is how to
put those things on the same kind of
plane formally so that we could kind of
think about uh uh different ways of
knowing and how different ways of
knowing have come out of different
practices of being in the world
hmm totally
um and I think you know this this idea
of collaborative knowledge building I
think is really powerful and really
important and you know you mentioned
that you know of course this is coming
from amerindian peoples and cultures
that are much more ancient that are sort
of contemporary ideas about knowledge or
or subjectivity
um and that's something that we've been
trying to emphasize at this Festival you
know we can't you know so I think that
um I forgot who said this this weekend
but someone said uh I think it might
have been uh I'm gonna forget but they
said that you know looking to the past
is looking to the Future
um and that's something that really
resonated with me and has continued to
resonate with me
um you know since then and so I mean
we're talking about the anthropocene in
this period of Jill of like drastic
geological change
um on top of drastic cultural and social
change as well
um and so what I mean not to be too
fanciful but in in Your Vision what
comes what comes after the answer scene
like what comes next and you know yeah I
think that I'm curious about you know
what can we do to
alter the course that that we're
currently on
yeah at first I'd sort of like to say
that for me I also see indigenous
knowledge as contemporary rather than
always being from the past like it's
modern it's as modern as we are uh so so
to think of all of these different ways
that have been happening presence uh and
also different ways of of operating with
time
[Music]
um I don't think like let's start with
no one really knows how to endure uh a
kind of Rapid deterioration uh of
possibilities of Worlds it's very very
unevenly distributed uh they're already
climate uh migrants and refugees uh
they're already places where uh human
habitations aren't possible
but like maybe there is something to
learn from uh uh indigenous worlds in
the sense that the experience of a world
ending already happened uh for a lot of
indigenous people so oh well that's a
that's a thing that those of us who are
from settler cultures could probably do
to learn from at this juncture uh Donna
haraway talks about can we you know make
the anthropocene as short as possible to
get as quickly as possible to things
that are habitable uh for as much of
life as as we can manage I don't know
who the we is in this these phrases that
I'm making but I think that's sort of
the task that the
um the the sort of the better futures
uh are disappearing in the same way that
certain species are you know kind of as
we speak
we've got a uh
got a question from the chat from the
audience at large
um talking about this from Eve talking
about knowledge production work and play
and how they intersect do you have any
thoughts on how knowledge work has
professionalized and how people who
aren't knowledge professionals can
contribute their play Slash work more
effectively
yeah that's a good one and I think there
are ways in which
um the a certain kind of play and here
I'm I'm really just retelling uh uh by
uh Johan hoisinger called homologens
there's this way in which maybe all
knowledge and culture comes out of play
would be racing as you know sort of
grand
meta-narrative but then sort of become
sort of formalized into institutions not
necessarily a bad thing but for housing
and maybe there's a way that the
institutions become too constraining and
some then the game sort of Simply become
repetitive
and proposing is the origin of
everything
um so why have we not amended the
American Constitution in a very long
time there was a time when it seemed
like the play of rewriting the rules was
open and then it stops uh and we now had
this whole school of legal thought about
never modifying it at all you know like
originalism so for hoising a law comes
out of play uh and so does uh philosophy
you know like posinger thinks about the
contest between rival philosophers
before the Tyrant you know as as the
origin of how we got that but but at
some point it became a very formalistic
uh sort of discourse of that arguments
had seemed a little disconnected from
everyday life so yeah maybe there's ways
we need to sort of like um very
carefully open the space between formal
and rule-based knowledge and kinds of
knowledge that isn't like we still need
forms of error correction around what we
think we know otherwise you end up with
conspiracy theories and things like that
so you know just because you looked up
some random stuff on like Google doesn't
mean you researched something that's not
really knowledge uh so Protocols of
error correction are kind of important
but there may be different ways that
those work and are interested in
Australian indigenous knowledge that
seems have been able to
error correct and pass on knowledge back
to the lake police to scene so we do
have some knowledge that predates the
Holocene that could be useful given that
we have another change in geological
error to Epoch to survive so yeah it's
it's a thing to be done a little bit
carefully but but
I kind of think that uh any knowledge
system whether in a formal space or not
can have its own kind of rules of error
correction and to be open to that
the um you know this in in thinking
through these you know the the
anthropocene and
um you know the the disasters that that
face us I I was just reading Prague
kana's recent book move where he talks
about mobility and Global change and
um you know his his vision for the
future comes from you know his vision of
the future is a nomadic one where people
move to resources where they are based
on availability and need and
um you know the world isn't this kind of
fixed place where you get this Suburban
house and you stay there and that's kind
of your place
um you know and you know this and not
you know thinking through like the
Contemporary the contemporaneity of
um of these these ideas which are large
as you mentioned are largely considered
I guess ancient or older
um you know and just seeing the cycle
kind of like continue to to continue to
spit I don't know I was really I that uh
that vision for the future kind of
struck me and uh it was a it was an
interesting one for for sure
um
you know and and another kind of vision
of the future you know you at the
beginning of your presentation you
brought up General intellects and that
your book and you know all the different
thinkers that are embedded in that book
and how you know you kind of posit that
with it's not really possible to Think
Through ideas anymore through one kind
of singular you know figurehead um we
need this kind of more kaleidoscopic
more more more broad inclusion of
multiple and potentially fragmented
ideas
um and I was wondering uh if you could
talk a little bit about
um how you came to to understand uh
thought this way and how that and how
this changed from the singular you know
iconic figurehead to this more expanded
way of I guess collaborative knowing
came about
yeah I don't I don't know my therapist
has probably got some good answers as to
why I'm just I really don't do well with
certain kinds of authority and and I'm
dependent as a scholar on people who
have like spent their entire life
reading derida for example like I'm I
rely on that and I and I don't I respect
that that one would choose a master
thinker and and operate in that space uh
I just kind of chose not to because I'm
interested in what sort of in between
but to sort of not do that thing of sort
of like averaging or leveling or just
like mushing things together
um which is a bit of an American grad
school syndrome you know where it's like
I'm gonna like mush in some Foucault and
some Judith Butler and whoever and and
it sort of doesn't really add up you
know uh it's like wait a minute you sort
of like these things are choices in a
way you can't just mush it all together
sometimes so yeah I wrote two books once
generally works in the other is sensoria
the sort of like collections of pieces
where and there's a little bit of a game
like part where I tried to get it to
about four and a half thousand words
only on each thinker and usually focused
on one book and sometimes not quite
their famous one uh to to kind of all
right so how can we sort of get uh a
little nest of Concepts out of this
person's work and sort of put it
alongside somebody else but without sort
of trying to Mush them together so that
the reader has got like different
perspectives and they're mostly from
Humanities and social sciences that's in
the Arts because that's words that I
know but they're still sort of like
incompatible and I think maybe that's a
necessary uh or at least useful skill in
the 21st century is to be able to think
a little perspectively that there's
probably something true and right in
some of these different perspectives but
not everything and and to be comfortable
in that into to show space in between
yeah I mean it's it you know there
nothing is ever one thing you know
um and I think that that's something
that we've been talking a lot about over
the over the course of the festival is
how we can hold all of these different
ideas and all of these different World
Views kind of at the same time because
if we can't understand the complexity of
the world and we reduce it to something
else we'll never be able to truly
understand it
um and maybe we can't ever truly
understand it anyway uh but uh you know
at least we can try to get get closer
um we have another comment from the chat
here
um Hannah asks if Utopia is a project
that has failed many times before how
might we understand various avant-garde
guards or cultures that aim to create
alternative presence and what
relationship do they have to Futurity
yeah
um
I mean there's
Utopia got caught up in a kind of cold
war discourse uh we're in the west you
know like the Soviet Union failed
because it was a utopian project whereas
like we in the west don't have one
that's not true like capitalism is also
a utopian project
and there's also the sense of Utopia is
like some perfect ideal
um but it's not really the utopian
literature is not really like that
um Utopias are more practical than any
other kind of literature uh Charles
Fourier who yes really did think the
Seas would turn to Lemonade uh it was
one of the few writers of his era who
really asked who was going to deal with
waste who's going to deal with trash and
[__] you know like Fourier was really on
that and tried to think that through
whereas the Bourgeois novel that is
contemporary with him like not everyone
goes to the toilet but won't think about
what you would do with it you know so I
think we need to sort of reframe Utopia
uh and I and I think they all came true
and they all worked up to a point but
they all just have some fatal flaw uh as
well where they don't quite work
perfectly in a way uh so there's yeah
one has to sort of rethink what what
Utopia is in a way and I've I've sort of
used the uh in in molecular red I'm sort
of thinking actually our Utopia is sort
of like a useful concept if you think of
it as like maximum practicality like the
opposite of what we usually uh sort of
trained to think it as and more recent
work I've sort of uh shied away from
that a little bit uh and tended to think
more about it's not Utopia because bad
behavior is still going to happen
there's nothing we can do about humans
um but maybe there's ways of thinking
about situations that are more habitable
interesting than others but maybe
they're temporary and maybe they don't
scale maybe that's the best we can ever
do so there's I think a little I'm in a
little pessimistic mood at the moment uh
where I kind of think that's sort of you
know like uh you can actually pull off
communism for about five hours for 300
people uh with some good drugs and
techno uh but then you have to go home
to capitalism and have your labor be
exploited or whatever you know but it
was but it was good for a morning
you know but how can that scale I'm not
sure no one knows yeah like no one knows
how to make anything scale at the moment
or endure
yeah oh that's really you know to to
endure that's really interesting I mean
it does feel like we're in this really
disposable time I mean ideas are
disposable identities are disposable
um it goes Way Beyond like consuming a
physical good
um
you you know just not to switch Focus
too much but um you you will actually
first of all um in general intellect I
just want to shout out that uh one of
the thinkers that you focus on is Wendy
Chun who was also a speaker here at
Great area festival and talked about her
new book discriminating data which was
awesome
um and kind of the structure of the
world around us but you also mentioned
another great area speaker Ben Bratton
um and his idea of the stack
um and I think that both of these you
know ways of analyzing the the
technological infrastructure around us
are really useful
um and I'm wondering you know in this is
a question I posed to a couple other
folks but I'm curious to hear your
thoughts
um the opacity of Technology seems to be
a real barrier to understanding the
whole context that we're we exist in and
that's something that continues to you
know confront us as a roadblock and I'm
wondering how you know in in trying to
think through this moment
um and even think through past moments
and then from that extrapolate future
one friends how do you grapple with the
opacity of the stack the the
incomprehensibility of it the
illegibility of it and the exclusion of
it as well
um and you know how can we think through
how can we approach it closer in order
to
perhaps build something more sustainable
I meant to put a slide in about Wendy's
work because I knew Ben was here and so
I put a little bit in about that so I
apologies to Wendy I kind of like the
slide fell out of the deck and then I
can talk about it uh and I've learned so
much from both of them by the way uh I'm
huge fans of both Wendy Chan and Ben
Bratton uh yeah like it's sort of like a
little bit the the very definition of a
technology is is a thing that hides what
it does uh so it's it's kind of like uh
uh a thing that will allow you to do
something in particular but you won't
notice that you're not doing it
something else is like this would be one
you know the very opacity could be the
definition of what a technology is
and then there's a kind of
um uh phenomenological Panic that
technology sets off but we sort of need
to feel ourselves to be separate from
the techniques uh and to sort of
demonize who's perceived to be closer or
to be invaded or infected by it it's
never us it's always somebody else is
too technical you know uh so there's
like there's this sort of failure to
Think Through we're all you know like
secondary products sort of you know many
layers deep of of tech next to so our
bodies won't function at all you know
there's no non-technological human and
probably never was you know not an
archaeologist but I I sort of get the
impression the hand and the tools seem
to evolve together it's not like we have
hands let's do something with it you
know it's like that's not really the
history of uh of hominins right uh so
I'm still not really felt through that
we're always inside at noise in a
relationship to it and then we're not
encouraged to think about too much
because it's sort of in the interests of
people who own and control Technologies
if you don't know too much about it you
know like these things appear to us to
sort of like closed devices that you're
not even allowed to open anymore uh so
yeah it's kind of hard and that's why I
do media studies you know because I I
feel like media technology studies are
kind of uh related and and let's not
have Border Wars around disciplines but
think those things together it's like
yeah how do you get people to think uh
critically in a good way uh about the
sort of embeddedness that technology as
much as something you can blame as the
the bad thing because we're in it and
it's in arts uh and it's nor is it
helpful to like you know like finger the
person who's too Technical and I'm now
one of those people like trans women or
like your body is artificial you're not
biological it's like honey nobody is
everybody's propped up by meds and
Prosthetics and we're all disabled at
some point in our lives you know it's
like yeah you're not trans but you're
born with a cesarean you know like you
came into the world through a Technics
you know like whether or you're a home
birth that's also a tactics that is also
right there's a there's skill and art in
in how you get a human into the world
probably has been for a long time so
yeah that's sort of a challenge like
they're they're like just even to begin
there's some some little conceptual
uh shifts you have to make to be able to
think uh the Donna haraway does this
beautifully in cyborg Manifesto It's
from 1984 it's the canonic version that
is still a great text for sort of
thinking yeah like we're woven into it
it's woven into Arts so let's move on to
a different set of questions
absolutely I mean I I learned a lot from
French Anthropologist Ludovic coupai who
really talks a lot about this and how
everything is a technology from the way
we stand up to the way that we blink you
know nothing is nothing is nothing is
truly biological it's all learned in one
way or another
um and those those learned behaviors
those Technologies of the body then
become things that
um you know are concretized through
through social action and that kind of
wrestle and kind of fit in with whatever
biological like inherent facet might
might be
um but I mean you know to to draw some
more from anthropology which is of
course my area of study and one thing
I'm really passionate about
um I love your ethnographic approach to
exploring these shared play spaces and I
thought that was such an in that was
such a that was such a cool thing
um I mean you know in thinking about
phenomenology and how things feel to us
I think that in a lot of instances
um you know
figuring out what the phenomenology of
that shared space is and describing it
under standing it and presenting it and
trying to capture it in small ways while
in some ways reductive also I think is
the the perfect first entry point into
understanding
um because we we understand everything
through our bodies and so I was
wondering if you could just talk a
little bit more about that project and
how it's been going so far and you know
what you've kind of learned from you
know adopting some of these these
techniques in your in your research
I think I was always an amateur
ethnographer like uh um hack of
Manifesto came out of you know the kind
of um uh avant-garde of of sort of media
art do-it-yourself pump Rock techniques
and so on of the 90s you know uh and I
just sort of hid the method a little bit
because some people didn't in that world
also didn't want to be too public or too
visible uh so I sort of wrote it as if
that wasn't you know like the footnotes
will will tell you what worlds I was
getting things from uh and and game of
theory also came out of just hanging out
with um the kind of people uh who were
like the avant-garde of game design uh
you know from around about 2000 uh when
I started working on Happy Manifesto
then I'm doing the game stuff and then
early 2000s there's this sort of little
Renaissance of game design going on and
I just like hung out with those people
um so but yeah it's like hackers Gamers
ravers if I if I finished the fourth one
would be Hustlers but that would be a
whole other project and I need a
different method because like those
before
um Persona that that strike me is
interesting at the moment
um yeah but I thought this time I'd
highlight the method a little bit and
the uh writing I'm doing a little bit of
it's Polished in noon magazine a little
bit of writing I've been doing on
um queer and trans rape culture in New
York City uh sort of puts me in the
story a lot more uh rather than sort of
just writing the concepts like I'm sort
of more interested in uh here's a
description of the situation uh here is
uh how I what I'm recording of how other
people perceive that so it's not just my
perspective but I'm making that more a
little bit clearer and here's the
concepts like how do concepts emerge out
of particular practices is a thing that
I'm sort of I think that's an
engineering theme in all of this work so
yeah the writing's different
um and and more fun I kind of I couldn't
write after I transitioned I actually
couldn't write like do real writing for
three years and I feel like I'm back but
the method and the style of it has
changed a little bit
um and yeah and it's just sort of like
oh like I always you know I wasn't as a
Scott I was never an archive rat as a
scholar like I can work in archives but
I don't love that and it's not my main
focus like I love learning from
contemporary cultures and sitting at the
feet of people who created things and
then seeing who's you know the advanced
guard off it now and that sort of thing
so I felt like I'd do that more
explicitly but then I'm in the double
bind because I can't really you know
like name some of the things that are
interesting to me you know I can I can
obviously I'm gonna quote certain people
who have said public things about what's
going on uh but yeah it's like oh
there's there's a way in which like I
don't believe there's a trump
methodology like or let's a priority
take all of the methods to be equal
um but to me there's something uh
there's a particular thing that the
ethnographic has to contribute and I'm
I'm a sort of amateur and late starter
in that uh as a method but I find it
really helpful
well it's I mean it makes so much sense
why I love all of your books then
because if I mean you can you can kind
of feel that and feel those those the
way that you've gone about that research
even if it's not presented exactly in
that way and I think that the I think it
comes through really really strongly
um
you know I we're just about out of time
which I'm really bummed about because I
have a million things that I wanna I
wanna ask you about
um but uh I am I'm I mean it's really
exciting that you're working on this
project with the Rave scene I mean what
a fun research project you know
especially when you're applying for
grant money you know um you know I never
applied to grant money what I never
applied for grant money oh I mean just
in general you know hey uh I gotta go to
the office and it's you know Bossa Nova
Social Club
I don't I don't I don't spend any time
raising money for this stuff I just go
do it and it's so freeing
oh I should take a page out of your book
that's awesome
well Mackenzie thank you so so much for
being here with us today
um I know you're just coming back for
some travel it must be kind of chat
lagged and tired so we really appreciate
your time on this evening
um everybody you can go and uh we're
gonna drop some links into the chat
where you can find all of McKenzie's
books I encourage everyone to yeah the
new book on Verso is
I believe it's it's capital is dead
capitalism is dead or is our new one
apple is dead there's uh a book on
kathyaka called Philosophy for spiders
Acura book of course that's a new one
that's one I haven't gotten my hands on
yet so I'm excited
yeah well thank you Wade thank you Barry
my thanks thank you so much for being
here thank you so much really perfect
way to close us up so
hi everybody bye